Experimental Rotor Aerodynamics

How accurately these theories reflect real conditions?
Possibilities of verifying these theoretical results by experimentation and measurement.

It is difficult to carry out aerodynamic measurements on wind turbines for a number of reasons. Without a lot of technical equipment, aerodynamic parameters can only be measured very indirectly, e. g. via the electric power output. Moreover, there is no definite reference wind speed in the free atmosphere. Moreover, suitable flow conditions cannot be produced to order and the wind unfortunately blows whenever and however it likes. One way out of these difficulties is to follow the example of aeronautics and use the wind tunnel.

Measurements on Models in the Wind Tunnel

The traditional measuring instrument in experimental aerodynamics is the wind tunnel. However, for several reasons, carrying out wind tunnel measurements on large wind rotors or even entire wind turbines involves certain difficulties.

% todas estas dificultades a la hora de medir en túneles de viento podría usarse para justificar el uso de mecánica computacional

Due to the large size of the wind turbines, it is not possible to carry out measurements on real rotors in the wind tunnel. Even the largest existing wind tunnels, with a cross-sectional measurement area of approximately 10 × 10 m, are too small. Model measurements can only be carried out at a scale where it becomes difficult to achieve useful Reynolds numbers, to say the least. Moreover, the constant and even flow conditions in the wind tunnel are an extreme simplification compared to the free atmosphere. Despite these restrictions, wind tunnel investigations are of useful service also to wind energy technology as long as the model measurements in the wind tunnel are carried out for solving specific questions and by using the right means. There are two different tasks to be considered in this context — one is measuring rotor power characteristics, the other is simulating the dynamic response of the rotor or of the entire turbine during unsteady flow conditions.

Power measurements do not require that the model is elastomechanically accurate and, moreover, can be carried out with steady-state flow conditions. The only condition to guarantee validity for the original is that a certain minimum value of Reynolds number be maintained. According to F. X. Wortmann, these types of measurement can be carried out with reasonable accuracy if, at the same blade tip speed, the model scale is selected such that the Reynolds number, referred to the chord length, is at least $2 \times 10^5$

Measurements on Site

It goes without saying that with each newly developed wind turbine, the electrical power output as a function of wind speed must be measured (power curve) on the actual turbine. This is not without problems since neither do the appropriate wind speeds exist at the measuring time — as do in the wind tunnel — nor is it easy to measure the correct reference wind speed.

It is even more difficult to analyze the aerodynamic properties of a wind rotor with measuring instruments from other engineering aspects. One example of this is the measurement of the rotor’s instantaneous power output with certain flow conditions, its response to gusts, or the structure of its wake.

Nevertheless, measurements carried out on real turbines are indispensable for certain tasks. Generally, these are effects which depend strongly on maintaining the model rules in fluid mechanics or on the turbulence of the real atmosphere, and thus cannot be simulated
in the wind tunnel, or they are phenomena which cannot be dealt with theoretically, as
they take place partially under separated-flow conditions. Moreover, only measurements
done on actual turbines can reliably determine the influence of the ambient atmosphere.

%% el siguiente párrafo es MUY IMPORTANTE!


On-site measurements are also indispensable for investigating the interaction between
wind turbines in a wind farm. There have been numerous research projects which investi-
gated the flow conditions in the wake of the rotor and the resultant influences on adjacent
turbines. This applies both to power losses due to mutual shading and to structural loads
resulting from the self-generated turbulence of a field of wind turbines.


A general
problem with measurements carried out on original turbines is the time
“
required. Waiting for the right wind” can totally upset the best budgeting and scheduling

plans. The length of time required and costs of a field trip under real conditions should not
be underestimated, therefore. Successful
“ planning and execution require the knowledge of
experts because, as a rule, the results of incidental measurements” made in the commercial
operation of wind turbines provide little valid information.


% Figure 6.2 es muy explicativa sobre las coordenadas y las fuerzas sobre el molino

Blade element
theory, as outlined in Chapt. 5, is a suitable instrument for aerodynamic loads from a
steady-state wind flow.

% Figure 6.22 es muy explicativa sobre steady wind profile y uneven wind-speed


% tengo que escribir algo sobre Wind turbulence model pero en el libro lo que tiene no es muy bueno
